.. _CID-1324: https://jira.rax.io/browse/CID-1324

===========================================================================
Return contactId for federated users from get/list users and validate token
===========================================================================

Description
-----------
When set, the **contactId** attribute is returned for provisioned users from
various services such as get user by id. As of `CID-1324`_, **contactId** can also
be set on federated users. This story is to validate/modify the various get/list
user and validate token services that support returning a federated user to also
return, if applicable, the **contactId** set on federated users.

Implementation
--------------
Currently all the affected services already return a federated user.
This implementation is to return **RAX-AUTH:contactId** attribute on a
federated user.

1. Maintain same permissions for all affected services.
2. **contactId** attribute must be returned if set.
 a) Do not return attribute if not set.

Affected services
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
1. Get user by ID (v2.0/users/{userId})
2. List users (v2.0/users)
3. List users by domainId (v2.0/RAX-AUTH/domains/{domainId}/users)
4. Validate token (v2.0/tokens/{tokenId})

Business Acceptance Criteria
----------------------------
#. Implement above changes for specified services
#. Update internal and public documentation to reflect these changes.
#. Update 3.19 release notes.

Test Acceptance Criteria
------------------------
TBD
