.. _CID-1230:
.. _CID-1241: https://jira.rax.io/browse/CID-1241
Using emailDomains query param in list IDP with invalid domainId returns 404
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Description
___________

The List IDP API service query param 'emailDomain' is supposed to be mutually exclusive from other query params. This
defect can be reproduced by supplying a valid emailDomain and invalid domainId query params on list IDPs.

This issue is related to `CID-1241`_ which mentions another edge case defect related to the mutual exclusivity of this parameter and
other params. As the AC requested here should address both, combining the two issues.

The application should treat empty string/null values for any query params as if the value was not supplied with respect to
this restriction.

Business Acceptance Criteria
____________________________

1. Query params provided to List IDP service that are null/empty string must be treated as if the query param was not provided
2. If a value is supplied for emailDomain and a value is supplied for any other supported query param, a 400 must be returned

Test Acceptance Criteria
________________________

1. Supply emailDomain = null/empty string combined with appropriate values for other query params.
    1) The app should respond in the same manner as if the emailDomain query param was not supplied.
2. Supply approvedDomainId = null/empty string combined with a value for the emailDomain params.
    1) The app should respond in the same manner as if the approvedDomainId query param was not supplied.
3. Supply two query params as null/empty string combined with a value for the emailDomain params.
    1) The app should ignore both the query params which are null/empty string
4. Supply approvedDomainId = existing domain id/non-existing domainId and emailDomain = existing emailDomain
    1) The app should respond with a 400 error.
5. Supply approvedDomainId = non-existing domainId and emailDomain = non-existing emailDomain
    1) The app should respond with a 400 error due to approvedDomainId being provided w/ emailDomain
6. (Regression) Supply non-existing email domain w/ no other query params
    1) Expect 200 w/ empty list
