.. _CID-1286:
.. _apply_rcn_wiki: https://one.rackspace.com/pages/viewpage.action?title=New+Identity+Role+Features&spaceKey=seamless
.. _CID-491: https://jira.rax.io/browse/CID-491
.. _CID-492: https://jira.rax.io/browse/CID-492
.. _CID-485: https://jira.rax.io/browse/CID-485
.. _CID-489: https://jira.rax.io/browse/CID-489
.. _CID-486: https://jira.rax.io/browse/CID-486
.. _CID-851: https://jira.rax.io/browse/CID-851
.. _CID-1194: https://jira.rax.io/browse/CID-1194

==========================================================================
apply_rcn_roles should only auto assign global roles to non-hidden tenants
==========================================================================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
  :depth: 3

Description
~~~~~~~~~~~

If the ``apply_rcn_roles`` param is supplied and set to ``true`` to Identity
services that support it, Identity will automatically assign all domain roles
the user is assigned to every tenant within the user’s domain. Since all users
are guaranteed to have at least one global role (``identity:user-admin
``/``identity-default``/ etc) this  means all users will receive each global
role on every tenant in the user's domain.

Identity previously used similar logic when assigning the
``identity:tenant-access`` role. It was dynamically granted to a user on every
tenant within the user's domain. Identity implemented a feature in 3.17.0
(`CID-1194`_) to exclude tenants of a specified set of
tenant types from receiving this role in this manner (with the exception of
user-admins/user-manage users which still receive the role on every tenant in
domain). The reloadable property ``tenant.prefixes.to.exclude.auto.assign.role.from``
contains a delimited set of these "hidden" tenant types. We need to apply
similar, but distinct, logic when denormalizing global roles to all tenants
within a domain. 

The distinction between what this existing implementation does and the change this
story requires is that an ``identity:default`` user (that
does not also have the ``identity:user-manage role``) never receives the
``identity:tenant-access role``, while, when ``apply_rcn_roles=true`` such
users must receive the domain role if, and only if, the user has another role
already assigned to that tenant. The existing logic does not change when
``apply_rcn_roles=false`` or the parameter is not supplied.

Affected API Services
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The change will impact all APIs that implement the apply_rcn_roles logic. The
full list of APIs that need to support ``apply_rcn_roles`` is listed at
`apply_rcn_wiki`_. Those services that have been updated as of the time of
this spec are listed in the table below:

.. csv-table:: Apply RCN Roles param support
  :header: Service, Original Implementation Story

  Auth Calls,`CID-491`_
  Validate Calls,`CID-492`_
  List (Global) Roles for User,`CID-485`_
  List Roles for User on a Tenant,`CID-489`_
  List Tenants,`CID-486`_
  List Endpoints for Token,`CID-851`_

Ideally the services would make use of the underlying logic used by the 
``get effective roles for user`` service. However, that is a "nice to have"
rather than a requirement.

As ``apply_rcn_roles`` is not currently in use and the existing functionality
includes a potential priviledge escalation, a feature flag is not required to
disable this change.

Business Acceptance Criteria
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
1. Implement above changes for specified services

Test Acceptance Criteria
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Create user-admin & a default user. Create a tenant X linked to their domain. Create tenant Y linked to their domain. Add a role to default user on tenant Y(Test with both adding the role explicitly & adding it to a user group default user belongs to).

**When apply_rcn_roles=true** :

1. Hidden tenants : X, Y

   Verify the affected api services show "identity:default" role on tenant Y but not on tenant X

2. Hidden tenants : X

   Verify the affected api services show "identity:default" role on tenant Y but not on tenant X(as no other role on tenant X)

3. Hidden tenants : Y

   Verify the affected api services show "identity:default" role on both the tenants X, Y

4. Hidden tenants :

   Verify the affected api services show "identity:default" role on both the tenants X, Y


**When apply_rcn_roles=false or when apply_rcn_roles is not provided** :

1. Hidden tenants : X, Y

   Verify the affected api services show "identity:default" role on both the tenants X, Y

2. Hidden tenants : X

   Verify the affected api services show "identity:default" role on both the tenants X, Y

3. Hidden tenants : Y

   Verify the affected api services show "identity:default" role on both the tenants X, Y

4. Hidden tenants :

   Verify the affected api services show "identity:default" role on both the tenants X, Y