.. _CID-1271:

================================================
EPS: Add service "List Effective Roles for User"
================================================

Description
-----------

EPS currently supports APIs to indicate why a user receives a particular role
(e.g. explicitly assigned to a user or received via group membership). In order
to maintain this functionality after the migration of EPS roles to Identity,
Identity must provide a means to identify how a user receives roles.

Additionally, a significant existing limitation with Identity's role support is
the degree to which they are silo'd based on how they are assigned. You can
either ask for all global roles on user via Service A or all tenant roles for a
user on a tenant via Service B. However, there isn't a service to retrieve *all*
the roles for an arbitrary user across *all* tenants. Instead you either had to
“authenticate” as that user, or discover all the user’s tenants and then loops
through them to list the roles the user has on each individual tenant.

With this story we'd like to solve both issues:

1. Provide a holistic view of all the roles a user is assigned across all tenants
   regardless of how the user is assigned the role
2. Provide all the ways the user received each role

-----------------
Endpoint Location
-----------------
As part of implementing user groups we implemented various calls for managing
user group role assignments. Rather than conflate roles w/ assignments of those
roles we introduced distinct objects to represent role assignments. For example,
see https://pages.github.rackspace.com/ServiceAPIContracts/global-auth-keystone-extensions/api-reference/user-group-operations.html#get-roles-for-a-user-group.

At the time we had said we wanted to add similar services for assigning roles
explicitly to users. The constructs created as part of user group role assignments 
can be expanded to support the source. A few existing endpoints dealing with roles
include:

**Legacy Role Service APIs**

- GET /v2.0/users/userId/roles - Lists all roles assigned as global roles on user
- GET /v2.0/OS-KSADM/roles - Lists all roles the caller can assign
- GET /v2.0/tenants/{tenantId}/Users/{userId}/roles - Lists all roles assigned
  to user on specified tenant (super user only)
- DELETE /v2.0/users/{userId}/roles/OS-KSADM/{roleid} - Delete global role
  assigned to user

**Newer Role Services on User Group**

- GET /v2.0/RAX-AUTH/domains/{domainId}/groups/{groupId}/roles - Get all role
  assignments on user group
- GET /v2.0/RAX-AUTH/domains/{domainId}/groups/{groupId}/roles/{roleId} - Get
  role assignment for particular role

Based on existing endpoints, the proposal is to create the new service at 
endpoint

*GET /v2.0/users/{userId}/RAX-AUTH/roles*

.. list-table:: Pros/Cons
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 40 40

   * - Pros
     - Cons
   * - Provides a single service to get a holistic view of all a user's roles
     - Since is a new service the initial test load will be higher due to having
       to test common functionality already existing in current service
   * - A new service eliminates risk of screwing up backward compatibility
     - 
   * - Initially only EPS will use so can tailor/limit initial functionality 
       to only EPS needs
     - 
   * - Continues movement of role assigment logic to be consistent w/ preferred 
       user group approach
     - 
   * - Provides an obvious extension point for future filtering capability
        - Filter by tenant
        - Filter by assignment type (global vs tenant)
        - Filter by sourceType (user group vs user vs system)
        - Filter by sourceId (e.g. specific user group)
     -
   * - Provides API path for future "assignment" based services on user
     - 

-----------------
Assignment Source
-----------------
A user can receive a given role through multiple methods.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 60
   
   * - Source
     - Description
   * - USER
     - Explicit role assignment to the user (globally on domain or on a set of 
       tenants)
   * - USERGROUP
     - Indirect assignment via user groups (globally on domain or on a set of
       tenants)
   * - SYSTEM
     - Identity System level functionality that automatically assigns roles 
        - identity:tenant-access
   * - N/A
     - "Identity Implicit Roles" - Authorization roles internal to identity only 
       and are not exposed by Identity via any services
        - identity:repose-standard implies other roles for identity
          authorization logic

A user can receive a role through multiple mechanisms for the same role. For 
example, they could
receive a role only on a specific tenant via one mechanism (e.g.
explicitly assigned to the user), while receiving it globally through another
mechanism (e.g. assigned to user group to which user belongs). 

The service's response must:

1. Show all mechanisms by which a user receives a role regardless of whether one
is effectively "masked" by another. 
 1) For example, a global assignment effectively masks a tenant assignment.

---------------------------
Global Vs Tenant Assignment
---------------------------

When a role is created it can specify how the role can be assigned

1. Globally
2. Tenant
3. Both Globally and for tenants

A globally assigned role is shorthand for assigning a role on all tenants within
the user/user groups's domain.

A user could receive a role only on a specific tenant via one mechanism (e.g.
explicitly assigned to the user), while receiving it globally through another
mechanism (e.g. assigned to user group to which user belongs). The service must 
be able to show all mechanisms by which a user receives a role

Many legacy services within Identity which return roles or use roles as a
filtering mechanism either deal with globally assigned roles or tenant assigned
roles, but not both. For example, the `list users for tenant` currently only
considers roles explicitly assigned on the tenant. If one tried to find all
users with access to the tenant with a specific role (an optional query param),
the service would **not** return any users assigned the role globally. The
feature *apply_rcn_roles* was implemented within a number of these services to
allow the services to dynamically denormalize globally assigned roles to be
assigned on every tenant within the domain. The long term goal is  for all
consumers of these services to specify the *apply_rcn_roles* parameter and have
Identity automatically denormalize all assignments to individual tenants.

As this is a new service, the service's response:

1. Must show the tenants on which each assignment source applies. 

--------------------
RCN Role Assignments 
--------------------
RCN roles allow a
user to implicitly receive roles on tenants in a different domain from the
user's own domain. RCN Roles can currently only be assigned explicitly to users;
they can not not be assigned to groups. Furthermore, they can only be assigned
"globally" (never directly on a tenant) and identity:admins+ are the only users
which can assign these role types. Eventually we want to provide end users the
ability to manage the assignment of RCN roles and allow them to be assigned to
groups.

Unlike regular role assignment, RCN roles are unambiguous. If a user is assigned
an RCN role, it was assigned globally to the user (on domain). While assigned
globally, RCN logic (rather than "global" logic) is used to determine the
appropriate tenants the user receives across all domains in the user's RCN.

It would be useful to understand from this service's response whether or not
an assigned role is an RCN without having to look up each individual role.

1. Must distinguish whether or not an assigned role is an RCN role.


List Effective Roles for User Service
-------------------------------------

Must support generic role assignment methods to groups, users, and by system.
The response is based on the existing tenantAssignments object, but adds an
additional *sources* array attribute.

The response doesn't specify to which domains the tenants belong. Each role as
user is assigned will be reprented as a single tenantAssignment. The
tenantAssignment will contain a consolidated list of all tenant ids on which the
user is assigned that role regardless of domain. Each reason the user received
the role on each tenant will be listed.

The key parts for each sources entry are:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 20 30
   
   * - Name
     - Type
     - Description
   * - **RAX-AUTH:roleAssignments**
     - Object *(Required)*
     - A role assignments entity.
   * - RAX-AUTH:roleAssignments.\ **tenantAssignments** 
     - Object *(Required)*
     - An array of tenant assignments.
   * - RAX-AUTH:roleAssignments.tenantAssignments.\ **onRole**
     - String *(Required)*
     - Role ID for tenant assignment.
   * - RAX-AUTH:roleAssignments.tenantAssignments.\ **onRoleName**
     - String *(Required)*
     - Role name for tenant assignment.    
   * - RAX-AUTH:roleAssignments.tenantAssignments.\ **forTenants**
     - String *(Required)*
     - An array of tenant IDs to which the role is assigned
   * - RAX-AUTH:roleAssignments.tenantAssignments.\ **sources**
     - An array of sources *(Required)*
     - An array of tenant IDs to which the role is assigned
   * - RAX-AUTH:roleAssignments.tenantAssignments.\ **sourceType**
     - String *(Required)*
     - The source of the role assignment. This can be
        - USER
        - USERGROUP
        - SYSTEM
   * - RAX-AUTH:roleAssignments.tenantAssignments.\ **sourceId**
     - String *(Required)*
     - A unique identifier for the source. For users and groups this is the
       respective id. For SYSTEM, this is the source system (e.g. IDENTITY)
   * - RAX-AUTH:roleAssignments.tenantAssignments.\ **assignmentType**
     - String *(Required)*
     - How the role was assigned to the source. This can be
        - DOMAIN
        - TENANT
        - RCN
   * - RAX-AUTH:roleAssignments.tenantAssignments.\ **forTenants**
     - Array of Strings *(Required)*
     - The list of tenants to which the role is assigned.
        
**Generic Example**

This is contrived to just so the different sourceTypes in a single example, 
and is not meant to represent a grouping of sources likely to be seen.

JSON::

 {
    "RAX-AUTH:roleAssignments": {
        "tenantAssignments": [
            {
                "onRole": "1234",
                "onRoleName": "roleName",
                 "forTenants": [
                     "t1",
                     "t2"
                 ],
                "sources": [
                  {
                       "sourceType": "USER",
                       "sourceId": "userId",
                       "assignmentType": "DOMAIN"
                       "forTenants": [
                          "t1",
                          "t2"
                       ]
                  },
                  {
                       "sourceType": "USERGROUP",
                       "sourceId": "UserGroupAId",
                       "assignmentType": "DOMAIN",
                       "forTenants": [
                          "t1",
                          "t2"
                       ]
                  },
                  {
                       "sourceType": "USERGROUP",
                       "sourceId": "UserGroupBId",
                       "assignmentType": "TENANT",
                       "forTenants": [
                          "t1",
                          "t2"
                       ]
                  },
                  {
                       "sourceType": "USERGROUP",
                       "sourceId": "UserGroupCId",
                       "assignmentType": "TENANT",
                       "forTenants": [
                          "t1"
                       ]
                  },
                  {
                       "sourceType": "SYSTEM",
                       "sourceId": "IDENTITY",
                       "assignmentType": "TENANT",
                       "forTenants": [
                          "t2"
                       ]
                  }
                ]
            }
        ]
    }
 }

**Across Domains Assignment Example**

Assume 
- d1t1 and d1t2 are tenants within the same domain (Domain 1)
- d2t1 is a tenant in a different domain.
- User has the 'observer' role assigned on tenant d1t1, d1t2 in Domain 1 and on tenant d2t1 on Domain 2

Note - It's impossible for the user to be directly assigned a role globally on own domain and on an explicit
tenant in another domain. A user can be assigned a role on a tenant in another domain and then receive that role
globally though user group membership. 

JSON::

 {
    "RAX-AUTH:roleAssignments": {
        "tenantAssignments": [
            {
                "onRole": "8899",
                "onRoleName": "observerr",
                "forTenants": [
                     "d1t1", 
                     "d1t2", 
                     "d2t1"
                 ],
                "sources": [
                  {
                       "sourceType": "USER",
                       "sourceId": "userId",
                       "assignmentType": "DOMAIN",
                       "forTenants": [
                         "d1t1", 
                         "d1t2",
                         "d2t1" 
                     ]
                  }
                ]
            }
        ]
    }
 } 

**RCN Role Example**

Assume:

- The user's RCN contains the domain Domain 1 with the d1t1 and d1t2 tenants
- The user's RCN contains the domain Domain 2 with the d2t1 tenants
- The RCN role applies to all the mentioned tenants

JSON::

 {
    "RAX-AUTH:roleAssignments": {
        "tenantAssignments": [
            {
                "onRole": "8899",
                "onRoleName": "rcn:admin",
                "forTenants": [
                   "d1t1", 
                   "d1t2",
                   "d2t1" 
                ],
                "sources": [
                   {
                      "sourceType": "USER",
                      "sourceId": "userId",
                      "assignmentType": "RCN"
                      "forTenants": [
                         "d1t1", 
                         "d1t2",
                         "d2t1" 
                      ]
                   }
                ]
            }
        ]
    }
 }

**User w/o Tenants Example**

The purpose of the service is to show roles assigned at the tenant level. A user could be assigned a role that doesn't apply to *any* current tenants for the user. For example, the user may only have DOMAIN roles on a domain that has no tenants. The user could also be assigned an RCN level role which doesn't match any tenant within the entire RCN. We still need to display the user is assigned the role, but that assignment doesn't apply to any tenants.

Assume:

- The user's domain does not contain any tenants
- The user's has the identity:user-admin role

JSON::

 {
    "RAX-AUTH:roleAssignments": {
        "tenantAssignments": [
            {
                "onRole": "3",
                "onRoleName": "identity:user-admin",
                "forTenants": [],
                "sources": [
                  {
                       "sourceType": "USER",
                       "sourceId": "userId",
                       "assignmentType": "DOMAIN"
                       "forTenants": []
                  }
                ]
            }
        ]
    }
 }

Business Acceptance Criteria
----------------------------
#. Create the service GET /v2.0/users/{userId}/RAX-AUTH/roles to return a user's
   effective roles
#. Response must show all roles (both global and tenant assigned) the user 
   receives via

   #. Explicit assignment to user
   #. User Group membership

#. Dynamically assigned by the Identity System
#. For each role returned, must

   #. Display roleId, roleName, explicit tenant(s) to which the role applies, 
      and the source of the assignment(s) as described in the spec
   #. Role entries must be grouped via role such that there is only a single entry
      per role with a list of all tenantIds on which the user has the role.

#. Caller must be identity:admin or identity:service-admin (else 403)

   #. If identity:admin, target user must be self or a lower level user
   #. If identity:service-admin, target user must be self or a lower level user

#. Update release notes as necessary
#. Update internal documentation to include API documentation for new service

Test Acceptance Criteria
------------------------
TBD

